Okay.
All right, everyone. Welcome to another
episode of the Mage podcast. It's been a
long time since I've uh I've done one of
those, but uh today we're joined with a
very esteemed guest. His name is
Professor Nicholas Wolfinger. He's
American researcher, an academic, and
educator. Um he's a professor at the
department of family and consumer
studies and a professor of sociology at
the University of Utah. um his research
is focused only in mainly on sociology
of family, religion and social
demography. Um a lot of the discussions
that have been happening online recently
Dr. Wolfinger have been relating to your
areas of research. So we thought we'd
call you on and um and ask your expert
advice on this. First question I want to
really ask you is relation to uh what
kind of family structures
you have found in your extensive
research to be most stable. Uh when I
say stable I mean most unlikely to end
in divorce. So what kind of trends have
you seen in um the American demography?
So I am great fun at weddings for just
this reason.
Yes. And what I typically do at a
wedding when someone finds out what I do
and what I study is I go down the list
and then I cherrypick all the attributes
that a any given couple has that predict
stability. And so here I can tell you
all the kinds of people who are less
likely to divorce.
uh people with a four-year college
degree, people who don't marry very
young, who that is wait until their late
20s, they're more likely to stay
together.
um people who are not from divorced
families,
people who are active in their religious
faiths and as I indicated earlier, it
doesn't matter what faith, just so long
as they actively participate and
regularly attend services,
right?
Um so in the United States, people who
live together before they get married
are more likely to get divorced. But
that varies some uh in Europe. I think
to the best of my know memory, Great
Britain is the same way.
Um people who have a lot of premarital
sex partners before marriage are more
likely to get divorced. People who have
a child before they're married are more
likely to get divorced. Uh there is even
a genetic component to divorce.
um that is part but by no means all of
the transmission of divorce between
generations happens genetically. This is
a study that's been replicated
more than once based on uh research with
twins.
What is this? So just um expand this
point a little bit more please. So what
the genetic components is quite
interesting. So I can't go much further
than that just because I am not a
geneticist nor have I cared to learn. Um
so I don't know I can't talk about the
science. All I know is that
uh we've long science has you know for
at least 80 years have known that if
your parents get divorced you're more
likely to get divorced. That's a very
wellestablished finding. You know that
was there a gender differential in that
in in so much as is a woman who is more
likely so for example is a woman who has
been divorced before more likely to be
divorced than a man who's been divorced
before.
Okay. I had actually been talking about
what your parents have done.
Yeah.
Uh but uh and so in that context there's
no gender difference. And now you're
talking about in second marriages.
You're absolutely right. Second
marriages have higher divorce rates. And
to the best of my knowledge, there's no
gender difference, intrinsic gender
difference. Part of it has to do with
stepids.
You know, create challenges. Part of it
has to do simply with the fact that
people who've already been married once
are shown that they're divorcers.
They're willing to get divorced. And so,
yeah, if they end their first marriage,
they're willing to end their second
marriage.
There there was really unusual
demographic anomaly that I came across
and I think you've mentioned it once in
one of your works which is a a woman who
has been divorced two times is more
likely to be divorced again than a woman
say who has been divorced three times.
What do you think the reason is for
something like that?
Oh oh oh I see what you're saying.
You're actually you're that's different
that's different research. So that's not
divorce. what I found that concerns how
many premarital sex partners you have.
Right.
And so yes, it is really curious. So uh
in general uh the people with lowest
divorce rates are those who get married
as virgins or only with one partner.
Some of the highest divorce rates are
people who have two partners. Two
partners raises the divorce rate more
than having three, four, five or six.
Um, and
I'm sorry, what
is this is this a gender specific
realization?
Oh, so no this Yes, it is. So this that
finding is only based on women just
because of limitations of that data set.
And what what do you think the reason
for something like that would be?
Um, so what why the two partners?
Yeah, I just found it quite unusual that
you know it's because you would expect
if there's a correlation Yes,
that the more you go higher that the
more
right.
I don't have I'm much better at
describing trends than actually
explaining them. I a lot of the time
just describe a trend and then step back
and leave uh leave the rest for others.
But here's what I think is going on.
If you have two partners lifetime, you
probably married one of them. Mhm.
That means you have one other partner
than your spouse. So I think that's a
comparison when you compare in your own
mind that's a comparison that looms
large. But if you've had three, four,
five, six partners, most of them are
less significant.
I think it's just a compar if you have
only two partner two exact two and
exactly two partners it's just a
comparison that's overemphasized
that second partner is the one that got
away
what I want to focus as well on is you
mentioned religiosity
contributing to kind of stability of
family um why do you think that is the
case
okay so this was the topic of by 2016
book with Brad Wilcox at the University
of Virginia.
Yeah.
And
one early finding that had been reported
was big gender differences by
religious faith. Um some faiths um
getting divorced more than others. But
then later studies came along and showed
that it's not that there's differences
big differences by faith. It's by
participation, by involvement.
And this is in the US context, right?
This is in the US. Yes. And so we found
the same thing. Uh people who attend
services regularly have are more likely
to get married, less likely to have
children before marriage, have happier
relationships whether or not they're
married, and are less likely to get
divorced. And it doesn't matter what
faith
uh you're a member of. just depends upon
how much you live that faith, how active
you are in it.
I want to ask a question on that because
you make the point that it doesn't
matter what faith. Have there been faith
faith specific studies to contra
contrast for example one faith with
another in the United States or is this
there have been
you know the biggest difference as I
mentioned in our pre uh recording chat
is that members of some faiths on
average are much more involved with
their faiths than others. Uh,
Catholicism, at least in the United
States, is the classic faith where many
people are nominal Catholics,
right?
They say they're Catholics. Uh, maybe
they attend uh, you know, church once a
year on Christmas Eve, but they're not
too involved. Whereas,
uh, say Mormons tend to be very
involved,
right?
That's the real difference. Sometimes
Mormons have a a stickier marriage like
are more Mormons more likely to have
stable marriages than
Oh yes. And just because they Mormons
tend to be very involved with their
faith and so that's what matters
even considering the polygyny or the
polygamous element that they have.
Uh that's a very tiny percentage of
people. You know the mainstream Mormon
church has renounced polygamy for over a
hundred years. That's just small uh
splinter groups or sex. Um and they um
those people don't talk about the
relationships because what they're doing
is in the gray area of what's legal.
Right. I understand. And um on this
point, have you have you also looked at
within a religious framework um what can
loosely be referred to as liberal kind
of religious people or andor
conservative religious people or
generally liberals and conservatives and
whether or not there's a differential in
terms of stability of family between the
two.
So in the United States, if we just
contrast liberals and conservatives, we
see that conservatives are much uh are
more likely to have happy relationships.
However, and here's the however, that's
entirely explained by the fact by two
attributes of conservatives
here. One, they're much more likely to
be involved in their religious faiths.
And
two, um,
race is strongly correlated with
politics here. African-Americans,
uh, are very unlikely to be
conservatives and have higher divorce
rates and less happy relationships. So
once we control for those two
differences, religious faith and race,
there's no difference between
conservative and religious here.
Okay. And on that point then is it what
about have you have you looked at
egalitarian type of relationships versus
what's referred to as complimentarian
type of relationships and seen
differences between those two and and
what kind of differences have you found?
So I don't do that work. Um uh there has
been a lot of research in the United
States. Um my understanding is that of
that work is it's produced a lot of
different findings. you know me very
much how you measure both the
complimentarity part the egalitarian
part and you know what outcome you
measure
um so uh there's
I don't it's produced a lot of different
findings
um you know that are specific to the
measures and in general I prefer
looking at things like mar just did they
stay married did they get married
because there's less measurement error I
can be more certain about
what I'm measuring. Does that make
sense?
Yes, it does. It does. Um, look,
obviously because you have problems with
defining the thing in the first place. I
mean, what is complimentarity? What is
egality?
Exactly. Exactly.
And, um, can I add one thing?
Yeah.
So, one thing that does predict a happy
relationship is simply agreement on its
terms.
Right.
Right. So, you know, if you agree we're
in a conservative, we have in a
traditional relationship and we're going
to be governed by these rules and we
both agree that work, you know, that
works because there's agreement.
Yeah.
You know, the same with agreement about
a less traditional relationship,
right?
Yeah. I was I was actually looking at
some uh I mean do you think the fact
that
the reason why is maybe uh some
egalitarian marriages are becoming more
successful maybe in recent times I'm not
sure if you've seen some data in the UK
or in Europe but there's some data that
maybe brings about that kind of
assumption maybe because of the cost of
divorce is there anything that you've
done on the cost of divorce for example
not just monetary cost but the fact that
if one gets divorced that um you know
the courts may rule against for example
the father in a custody battle. Have you
looked at those kinds of socioeconomic
variables?
A couple of things there. First of all,
divorce is at has peaked at least in
America around 1980 and has been
declining for about 40 years.
Right.
Um so it's always impossible to know
exactly why.
uh it's there's been le uh less divorce,
but one reason certainly is by 1980 it
was becoming more clear what living in a
high divorce society was like.
Um and we backed off a little bit.
What causes what are the top reasons in
America? Uh what are the top reasons
that call people get divorced? Why why
do people get divorced in America? So
marrying too young is a big one and
that's one reason why there's less
divorce nowadays because people are
waiting until they're older. Um, another
thing that's uh part of a big part of
the story in the United States and I to
the best of my understanding in the UK
as well is that you go back 40 years ago
and there was no difference um in
marriage and divorce by whether people
had completed a college education.
Now there's a huge difference whereas
people who have four-year college
degrees are much more likely to get
married and stay married.
Okay. So is that is that correlation
between education and divorce? The more
educated you are is that what you're
saying is the more the less divorce.
Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah.
Okay. And um are there any other trends
on divorce? What about infidelity for
example? Is there anything on that? Um,
so I've actually written about this.
Yeah.
Um, and there's a piece, you know, a
piece I can send you the link to on the
family studies blog.
Uh, so
it's
can you the family studies? Can you tell
us what that's about because some people
might want to go.
This is the Institute for Family Studies
is just a research institute based out
of the University of Virginia and run by
my collaborator and co-author W.
Bradford Wilcox and they have a very
large
um you know well-funded blog where they
produce a lot of research briefs about
the family. So a lot of my re short
research briefs end up there,
right?
Um and so some of the stuff like the
stuff about the number of sex partners
and divorce ended up there.
And you were talking about infidelity.
You were about to make a point about it.
Yes.
Thank you. Um, so there's
not a hu uh it's not a huge trend and
the data are a little ambigu ambiguous,
but they do seem to point to a future of
less infidelity because the people who
cheat the most seem to be boomers who've
been married for 20 or 30 years and got
bored. So just not only just people from
a certain generation having reached a
certain point in their lives, those two
things combined seems to have produced
more infidelity, but you know for
younger people less so.
Another thing I'd point out is that for
you know there are now and this isn't a
this isn't a super popular option but
there's now much more of an
infrastructure for having a non-
monogamous relationship. I mean,
polyamory is a word we know and it
wasn't a thing until 20 years ago. Now
there's in any large city in America,
there's groups and books and communities
to sustain people who choose to be non-
monogamous in their marriages. That's
uncommon though. Most people want
marriage as traditionally defined. But
to the extent that there has been a
small growth in non- monogous
relationships, you know, that will
undercut the rate of adultery
and you know or cheating adultery, you
know,
tradition. Yeah.
I wanted to ask um because I know we're
kind of tight on time in terms of so I
want to ask you a few more questions.
One of them was relation to hypergamy
and homogamy.
um the the studies I've looked at um
seem to indicate that hypergamy I think
one of them was actually institute by
the um published by the the institute
that you mentioned um that hypergamy is
a very stubborn thing and that it
continues that women tend to uh for
example um marry across and up dominance
hierarchies
um to how do we understand this trend
so uh I find hypergamy is not as strong
a force as homogamy. Homogamy that is
marrying people like yourself,
right?
Uh so in fact uh homogamy based on
education has risen a lot in the last 30
years in the United States. It used to
be fairly common that men married women
who had less education.
No longer. Um now increasingly there is
homogamy that based on education. In
other words, people with college degrees
marry other people with college degrees.
Uh, one thing to note here and this is
some of the best news in the field is
that heterogamy that is marrying outside
your group on race in the United States
has increased a lot by a hundfold.
Whites marry blacks more. Blacks marry
whites marry Mexican-Americans. Asian
that's increased a lot in this country.
and that, you know, we I celebrate as
good news as,
you know, a lessening of racial
barriers.
And, uh, on this point, I'm not sure if
you are aware of this, um, there are
some groups online like the red pill
movement and the so-called manosphere
and stuff. Many of which, I have to tell
you, actually use your information.
Oh, yes. Yeah, they're they're, you
know, uh, they're free to. In fact,
uh I actually did a podcast
uh with a guy who calls himself angry
Mikttow. In other words, Mikttow is men
going their own way.
And uh you know I I did a good
interview. He you know he asked good
questions and I answered them. Uh but
yes, so these people uh this movement
does exist. But uh
uh have you heard about uh what's often
called rule 32
in culture
is if if it exists there is porn of it
online.
And so my the broader point is if any
conceivable movement exists you know or
any anyone has an idea it's online. And
so there are just uh first of all there
are I think there's this is a tiny
number of people.
Yeah.
Uh second I think to the extent I think
their cultural moment has sort of passed
and that's something I was hearing a lot
more about three years ago than I am
now. Mhm.
It's uh I'm
I don't know if that corresponds to the
rejection of Trump in this country or
many other things, but yeah, they're
there. They're uh but uh I think they'll
always be there just but I they seem
less salient than they were a couple
years ago. And some of the things that
they do talk about, some of the you can
say the pillars of their movement or the
crux of what they're trying to say, uh,
seem to revolve around some of these
concepts which you're an expert in in
terms of academia or things like
homogamy and hypergamy. And they seem
to, from my reading, uh, you could say
reduce, so you'd say, you know,
reductionist approach to hypergamy is at
least that's how I've seen it that um,
and then from that kind of give advice
to young men of how to get married. All
you've got to do is make money. I mean,
from your research, do you I mean, it's
quite relous, but um be a high value man
by by by making money in this way. From
from your kind of research, do you think
that this is uh to what extent do you
think that this is good advice?
I mean,
you know, fundamentally, people with
more more money are more likely to get
married. Um I don't all you do that's of
that is as you point out totally all you
need is money is of course totally
reductionist but it helps part of the
reason you know part of the logic
underlying that is that it in nowadays
uh men feel like they can't get married
until they're able to provide you know
support a family.
Yes. And you know, 50 years ago, people
would, you know, before starting careers
would get married right out of school,
whether it was secondary school or
higher education, they would get
married. Now they wait.
Um, I didn't think those make those
manosphere types wanted to get married.
No, I mean the red pill movement is more
than they've got different kind of the
migtals don't want to get married
because the men going their own way, but
there are some of them who who do want
to get married. Some of them, you know,
part of the red pill movement who give
men advice on how to get married. Uh
there's different kinds of uh advice
that they give to young men and so on,
you know, how to ensure that you're uh
more attractive to women and so on.
But yeah, a lot of it is based on this
demographic data. And that's why I
thought
it would be would be important to kind
of ask. On the flip side, um there's
obviously many feminist theorists as
well.
Yeah.
Who may use demographic data to try or
may even try and undermine, dare I say,
some demographic data because like some
of the things that you're saying
obviously uh indicate that um well,
egalitarian marriages you mentioned at
the beginning are not are not as
successful. you could put it in this
crude way as um quote unquote
complimentarian marriages. Um how have
you responded to that kind of discourse?
You know, uh I really haven't gotten
that many critics. I mean, part of it is
what you alluded to. There's a lot of,
you know, the devil is in the details
when we talk about complimentary versus
egalitarian.
Um and you know, that can be defined a
lot of different ways. Um,
so certainly there have, you know, I
occasionally have been attacked from, I
guess, what I'd call the anti-marriage
feminist strain.
Yes.
Um, but you know, my response to that
is, you know, you're not living in the
real world. And the real world is that
most people want to be married.
And you know if they don't want to be
married most people want you know still
want stable monogous relationships.
Um
you know it's a funny phenomenon in
higher education especially but also
just in many elite circles where you
know people uh you know academics will
denounce the bgeoa institution of
marriage when they are married
or when when they're living with
partners in relationships that look
exactly like marriage.
Exactly. I want to ask you a couple more
questions. Uh maybe this is a
penultimate one before we end. Um what I
want to ask is there's a lot of data
coming out recently especially um from
people like Warren Farrell uh who've
written the boy crisis uh and others who
who emphasize how important stable
families are. What they seem to be doing
in their work is they look at like um
the amount of kind of delinquency if you
want to use that kind of word or
criminal activity for example that
happens in society and they've
correlated that kind of trend with sing
people being raised in a single mother
household. Obviously there are obviously
exceptions to this rule and we're not
generalizing but to what extent can it
be said that single parent households um
or people living or children living or
growing up in single parent households
especially if uh they're mothers um can
contribute to this kind of um kind of
criminality future criminality or
something like what extent is there a
predictor?
So that that's a good question and uh
let me answer it a couple of different
ways. Uh the first is to point out that
yes, that research is all correct in
that people who aren't from two parent
families
um uh have the kids have higher rates of
delinquency. They're less likely to
finish high school in a timely fashion,
less likely to college. In short, you
can, you know, predict almost any
outcome with that variable. Now, let me
give you some numbers. Um, and these are
numbers produced, you know, decades ago
by Sarah Mlanahan at Princeton
University, who's one of the leading
scholars in this area that I still
quote, uh, is being instructive. Sarah
showed way back when that 31%
of kids from
uh whose parents weren't together don't
graduate from high school on time
compared to just 13% of kids whose
parents do graduate from high school on
time. Keep that in mind. 3113.
Now let me show you why there's two ways
of looking at that. If your cup is half
empty, you point to 31 being 2 and a
half times 13 and you can legitimately
say that kids from non-attacked families
are much more likely to have trouble in
school. Now suppose your cup is half
full. You point out also truthfully that
over twothirds of kids from non-attacked
families still graduate from school on
time and a small minority of kids from
intact families don't. Right? So it's a
factor but it's far from being
dispositive.
Uh let me also uh tell you of another of
Sarah's findings.
Uh she found also that that gap in high
school completion, half of it was
explained by economics. That is single
parent families are often poor. If they
weren't poor, that 1331 gap would be cut
in half.
So family, you know, family structure
matters, but a lot of other things
matter, too. What Faren I think
mentioned on this uh which I thought I
don't know what to make of it and ask
you this is I think he compared single
parent families single parent male
families versus single parent female
families and concluded that single
parent male families are more likely to
be successful so-called successful based
on the parameters that we've spoken
about.
I think that's
Yes. I think you know there was a a
really thorough evaluation of that study
about of that concept about 20 years ago
right
where the researchers did hundreds of
comparisons
yes
uh between male families female families
and they found overall found little
difference so I think there's some
cherrypicking going on still
if you ask me in a you know so I think
that's the best answer however if you
ask me in a vacuum
My guess is that the fathers, you know,
might produce better results for their
kids. But the reason is just uh
custody is rare,
right? Do you think economics has
something to do because the man is
Yeah. Oh, absolutely. Father custody is
rare. I think, you know, fathers only
get custody, you know, in this country
at least usually only get custody when
the the real problems with the the
mother.
Yes. Yes. or you know the father is a is
a super parent right
in general the that I think it's better
to say you know it make it's much more
supported by today this is just there's
a little difference
right right that's that's these are
really good uh trends what what kind of
things I mean putting aside the red pill
this is the last question I'll ask you
today
I I saw that movie
the documentary as well yeah but putting
aside the kind of advice that they would
kind of give or maybe feminists would
give. What would be the advice that you
would give?
General advice based on the the trends
that you have seen on what kind of
things that may be within our control
that we can control in order to have
stable families if that's what we want.
Okay. So, don't marry too early.
You know, wait till your your late 20s
is one.
Um you know in general homogamy predicts
marital stability. So marry someone
exactly like you
in you know as many ways as possible.
Now of course a lot of this is outside
our control right? You know we don't you
know we don't uh go down a list like
this in choosing our you know the you
know the people we meet.
But in general yeah marry someone like
you.
I I joked in terms of homog heterogamy
based on religion. It's hard to marry
someone you know is going to hell.
[Laughter]
It is a good it is a good point to be
honest with you. And and then you have
the complications of the children and
how they're going to be raised.
Yeah. So yeah, I I've you know I've
joked like this too. So how you have to
decide how they're going to be raised?
Do you let them pick your own faith? Do
you send them to,
you know, uh, church one week and mosque
the next week? Do you right, you know?
Exactly. No. And especially if it ends
in divorce, a lot of it is outside the
control. Namely, as you've mentioned, of
the man because if he's not getting
custody for obvious reasons, then it
will be out of his control.
Although some things are still in his
control, right? He can still contribute
to the material upkeep of his children.
He can still be involved. he can still
try to avoid conflict because one of the
most, you know, replicated findings is
that conflict is bad for kids.
I've seen that in your book and your
book is called Understanding um the
Divorce Cycle, isn't it?
Yes. Yeah, that's Yeah. my first book my
you know more recently you know I've had
books the most recent book is soulmates
religion sex love and marriage
um among African-Americans and Latinos
and really everyone in the United States
um
uh I lost my train of thought but that's
okay
well thank you so much for all that
you've presented in terms of uh
information uh I think a lot of people
will see from this obviously that the
issue is more complicated than being
able to reduce it in a few variables. Um
about that as you've mentioned there are
some positive trends moving forward and
we hope to be able to uh keep stable
families in society. Thank you very much
Professor Winger.
Thank you so much Ra. That's better put.